we open with my favorite caveat if I
look exhausted it's because I am
exhausted
'sheriff to everyone who's been watching
this channel since 2015 you'll recognize
that phrase and for those of you who
have been watching my channel for a long
time you might be surprised that this
video opens with the declaration
idealogy
is not an entirely negative influence on
people's lives one of the most positive
effects of ideology is that it provokes
people into thinking through their own
ideas in a coherent way to think about
the consequences of their ideas for
society as a whole scaling it up moving
beyond their own narrow and isolated
self-interest I think one really
positive example of this right now is
the effect that discussions surrounding
transgender political ideology are
having for individual transgender people
now if you've known a couple of
transgender people in your life you've
probably known at least one who said to
you at some point look for them
personally this isn't a political
movement you've probably met at some
point a transgender person who took you
aside and said look for them it isn't a
philosophy it isn't an ideology it's not
a political party that wanted to write
up - this is just what they do on the
weekends this is just what they enjoy
sexually in their private life or this
is the nightclub they choose to go to
and for them that is it well there's
something kind of isolated and narrowly
self-serving about that in contrast to
engaging with a political ideology that
challenges you to ask yourself the
question what kind of society are we
building when we move beyond tolerance
when we move beyond you know removing
short term simplistic obstacles like is
it possible or impossible for a
transgender person to be a school
teacher to be a university professor
those are real questions in almost every
society on earth in the 21st century we
move beyond those narrow you know
simple problem solving challenges where
are we going with this thinking about
that ad logically I think it really is a
kind of positive stimulus for people
that reflect on who they are on their
desires and on the implications of their
desires for other people for society as
a whole
ethically what it is you're trying to do
so etiology is not an entirely negative
thing it's not just something we should
lament for the dangers it prevents in
21st century society without admin said
one of the problems with the ideological
charged nature of debate on the Internet
is that some things get discussed and
debated as ideologies when that is not
truly what they are um
the capitalist system is not an ideology
and I openly say for example that I am
anti-communist that I utterly despise
cool unquote anti capitalism I'm even
pretty harsh on social so if you've
watched this channel socialism as a
concept in its historical context um
communism is an ideology and it's very
easy for people to slip into the
mentality of saying that therefore they
oppose capitalism as a counter posing an
alternative ideology but when you really
get down to it what you're talking about
with capitalism is a set of social norms
and practices that emerged out of the
collapse of feudalism and emerged
independently in for example Japan and
Holland Holland now the Netherlands
emerged independently in different
political social and cultural conditions
all over the world and it was not guided
by an ideologies it was not guided by a
utopian vision okay the single greatest
transforming force in human history was
the indulge the Industrial Revolution
okay the Industrial Revolution was never
a utopian project it was never an
ideology this scientific breakthroughs
that took place in what's now called
the Scottish enlightenment so really the
discovery of electromagnetism even the
discovery of the modern toilet and then
deploying you know for the first time
you know whole cities the first time
having sewage and running water deployed
to them huge transformations in in
modern life that we now take for granted
many of these things came about with no
ideology whatsoever likewise if you look
at the historical development of the
stock market the stock market was not
created for any ideological purpose it
didn't result from some grand scheme of
what society ought to be or what have
you and interestingly the stock market
had completely separate origins in Japan
and in the Netherlands it's a very
specific example of what's now a crucial
aspect of capitalism as we understand ok
the development of the banking industry
in Europe is unique because in Europe
they had this religion you may have
never heard of called Christianity and
that made banking illegal so against the
conditions that shape the emergence of
capitalism the breakdown of feudalism
the breakdown of the hegemony of the
Catholic Church and the Eastern Orthodox
Church of the breakdown of the control
of European Christianity that prevented
banking as we know it this this wasn't
an ideology it wasn't the grand plan it
wasn't utopian vision even the
transformation of the meaning of
property this is one of the least
document at least understood issues in
the genesis of capitalism the fact that
words in French like immobilier it used
to truly mean immobilier they used to be
unbelievable restrictions on on property
the transformation of the system of
monopolies into free enterprise of
course the end of slavery piece by piece
the components of capitalism came
together I can't even call it like a
bird's nest I mean what we now refer to
as capitalism is a set of best
practices that largely emerged from the
failure of practices with no guiding
ideology with no utopian strategy with
no grand design now likewise today what
most of us live in is a mixed economy
and of course we say next because we
mean a mix of free market and centrally
provided taxpayer-funded government
services the private sector and the
public sector mmm all of those
compromises likewise emerge in a
completely unplanned its funniest way
right if you can look at the history of
each country and it's a different story
but of course in some ways it's kind of
sort of the same story when the United
States has this narrative about the
Great Depression also we can't actually
start there the Progressive Era in the
1890s and then the Great Depression and
then world war two unionization and
workers rights and minimum wage all
these things emerging well you know
guess what if you study the history of
Holland and history of Japan it's a
different history that produced
fundamentally similar compromises and
thus there's a kind of homogeneity to
capitalism globally now even though
normally when you're looking at what we
describe as capitalism in any one place
it's emerged from different
circumstances in a very strange
staggering unplanned way it's also worth
noting that the exceptions to the rule
are by and large less successful than
the places where it emerged unplanned
and if you like organically or
spontaneously so you know Eastern Europe
after the collapse of communism which is
recent history so really talking about
after 1991 varies a little bit from
place to place what you're talking about
those are places where capitalism was
constructed more consciously and
intentionally nobody today looks at the
Ukraine as a positive example of what
capitalist must be I hate I hate to do
this to you guys I hate to do this to
you nobody looks at Hungary as a
positive example nobody looks at the
former Yugoslavia as a positive example
now admittedly there's some bias
involved there but if you believe that
ideological chalkboard planning of
capitalism is a huge advantage then we
should be able to look at these
relatively recent relatively artificial
consciously intentionally planned
capitalist economies and we should see
much greater success than the places
where capitalism emerged in a zigzag
messy unplanned way and by the way guys
if you would know anything about the
history of Hong Kong and Singapore you'd
be surprised
it's you'd be surprised just how messy
and unplanned the emergence of
capitalism there another great case
study Israel the emergence of capitalism
in Israel it's a very short history and
you know the success of Israel is a
free-market economy another anyway
another fascinating bizarre case study
all right
so I am here my lengthy preamble about
the fact that capitalism cannot be
understood as something created by the
capitalist manifesto all right
communism has the Communist Manifesto
and capitalism does not have a
capitalist manifested all right what
capitalism has is a set of lessons
learned from the drawbacks and color
ultimately the collapse of feudalism in
Europe it was European feudalism in
Japan it was Japanese feudalism and you
know I think it's really worthwhile to
say to yourself hey look you know what
when you're talking about Malaysia it's
a completely different story of how
we've ended up with capitalism and
that's why in some ways capitalist
Malaysia has not been successful in the
same way that it was in some other
cultural context
they never got they never got the
capitalist manifest though they never
tried to live up to to a set of J market
okay so probably this preamble could be
a perfectly good standalone video in
itself but is not why turned on the
camera day this isn't the message I can
deliver to you some people knowing that
I am in this way a defender of
capitalism against communism and maybe
more importantly that I defend
capitalism against so-called anti
capitalism the stupidest ideology of
them all um they're surprised when I say
in a frank honest down-to-earth way the
capitalism has serious disadvantages the
capitalism has serious drawbacks okay no
why would I be reluctant to say that um
you know refrigerators have serious
drawbacks
I own a refrigerator right now
technologically I don't have anything
better to replace it with but you know
what for thing refrigerators are noisy I
don't want to have a refrigerator in the
same room I sleep in they use a lot of
electricity they take up a lot of space
they're incredibly heavy we can start
listing all the ways in which a
refrigerator is less than optimal and
yet it's something right now we're all
making our compromise with until
somebody can come up with something
better so there's there's absolutely no
reason to you know be mosy or apologetic
in bluntly and directly talking about
the drawbacks and disadvantages of
capitalism for me the number one issue
that nobody wants to talk about on the
left or the right with capitalism is
actually the depopulation of rural areas
or to put it in more universal terms the
increasingly unequal distribution of
your population geographically so under
feudalism you had a system that was very
very good at keeping the population
fixed to a plot of land to some extent
even tribalism does this much more
effectively than capitalism it
distributes the population and then you
know communicates to people powerfully
this is your land your
to it this is your responsibility so you
know if you're talking about
distributing human beings along a
frontier or even along a highway or
along a river you could pass many
centuries in a feudal system with your
population distributed this way
as soon as feudalism starts decay in and
starts being replaced by capitalism and
piece by piece and again there's this
different history in France in Germany
and England in Japan
part of the dynamism of capitalism is
that people abandon the countryside and
start moving to the cities they start
moving to the places where the greatest
opportunities generally the greatest
risk as well as the greatest rewards and
they even do this when there is not yet
any technology that offers them the type
of rewards we now associate with
urbanization they even do this when
moving to the city means that you're
risking death by cholera or death by
malaria depending on which clime were
talking about when really your quality
of life and health get much much worse
so the crowding of people into cities
now in the 21st century you you look at
a map of Japan you know tell this in a
more human and tangible way I met at my
University Canada a team of people doing
research on this in in rural Japan
they're visiting my University in Canada
they were talking with the fact that
basically all of Japan has these
villages and small towns were now the
only people are elderly retired people
and occasionally the grandchildren or
great-grandchildren of those overly
retired people who are left there with
the elderly people while the parents are
working in Tokyo while the parents are
working in a big city and the parents
come to visit once every two weeks or
something but the kid gets to grow up in
the countryside and those few kids light
up the lives of these elderly people who
otherwise live in a in a ghost town that
is nothing but elderly people because
everyone who's up working in each has
abandoned the town everyone is even of
university age has a ban of the talent
to pursue education and opportunity in
the big city now this is a profound
problem with capitalism and I wouldn't
claim that there is no solution for it
the problem is that almost nobody is
even talking about a solution in a
country like Canada the more urban
property prices go up the more money the
government makes out of those properties
the government makes money out of every
new apartment and condominium and house
that gets sold in Vancouver and Toronto
as each property goes up above a million
dollars the government's making more and
more money they have a vested interest
in fueling the property speculation and
real estate development cycle and
seemingly the whole public is happy to
participate in there's a ludicrous and
self-destructive process whereby the
countryside and smaller towns all get
emptied out and hollowed out and
everyone starts living in just a couple
of cities a couple of big cities where
again kind of greatest risk and greatest
reward people are no longer afraid of
cholera but they move to a city where
more than 50% of their income is being
spent on their rent of course the only
other way of coping is to commute huge
distances to get back and forth from
these mobile crisis it ease there is
basically no capitalist country in the
world today that is sincerely interested
in decimating the property that was
proved in 2008 right there is no
government that's going to be elected in
New York City and so you know what we
need to do the government needs to
completely sabotage the value of
condominum condominiums and apartments
we need rent to fall by like five to one
and we need the sale prices of houses
and apartments to fall by ten to one and
we're gonna make it happen you know
governments can make that happen the
problem can't be solved and I don't even
mean rent control I mean there it was
pretty simple toolbox the urbanized the
prom' is okay it's partly just a free
market phenomenon this again is already
kind of evident in the Renaissance it's
already evident for centuries in some
countries it's accelerating in the
twenty-first century but in case it's
still a profound problem but it's a
tendency that governments now
are not checking or deterring if
anything government's are part and
parcel of this problem that's inherent
in or emerges from market forces okay
now point two is there is absolutely no
natural relationship between education
and employment under capitalism okay
they don't believe me
I'm not suggesting to you that education
was better under feudalism but I'm not
suggesting it was better at her
communism so hot but we live in a world
where people as students as teenagers
are expected to make a speculative
decision with tens of thousands of
dollars of their own money and with many
years of their lives to choose a
university or choose a college even
choose a technical training program for
some for some skill some craft some art
they are supposed to make that bet
on the assumption that there will be
demand for them to do that job that
they'll be paid a good wage that they'll
earn a good living doing it and very
often they are wrong mmm conversely the
most popular areas of Education in
Canada being a schoolteacher in Canada
being a history major you have a
situation where academia produces a
hundred times more people than could
possibly be needed or wanted in that
sector one that I actually formally
enrolled in and then decided not to do
the course you know even in Canada being
a paramedic it's massively over enrolled
I wonder if that's because people watch
reality TV
in the 1990s like people used to watch
these TV shows that showed paramedics
but a lot of people want to be a
paramedic they like the idea of working
in the back of an ambulance even though
it's very low paid they like the idea of
driving the ambulance in whenever and I
forget at the time it was certainly ten
to one but they were afraid it was ten
to one or 51 but Canada was producing
far too many paramedics and there really
were not jobs for all of them and also
they were being underpaid so we have a
situation where there is no relationship
between free market mechanisms the
economy whatever II want to say
capitalism as such in the mix of free
market and government involvement in the
provision of education
now the other fundamental absurdity
which combines with both of these first
two problems in a dynamic way is rent
itself pretty much any textbook will
tell you rent is irrational under in
terms of the logic of capitalism and of
course rent shapes everything we do
which shapes my life right now I'm
living here right now partly because
rent is cheap um if you have two
businesses that are competing there are
two shops that are both selling falafels
okay one falafel shop makes better
falafels and they innovate more and they
have a greater selection of products
let's and they have a smoothie machine
they sell drinks and vegetable juices
they're really great and there's another
falafel shop where the owner is lazy he
only makes three kinds of falafels
he doesn't care there's no innovation no
smoothies and let's also just say it's
kind of dismal he doesn't make a make an
effort to make it a nice place to sit
guess who's gonna win in free market
competition the person who pays less
rascal
all free market competition is unfair on
an irrational basis because the guy who
owns the lousy falafel shop if his
grandfather owns the property and his
grandfather is charging him rent whose
grandfather may let him run the business
for free but let's say his grandfather
just says hey look you know what you
know you and I were blood I'm gonna
charge you a really low rent for this
reason happens very common and the other
person is renting from a complete
stranger at market rates maybe they even
get ripped off they have a really mean
landlord who's charging the absolute
maximum guess who is gonna win and guess
who is gonna lose in terms of free
market competition and there's no
counter-argument to this and it infests
every part of our lives the amount
you're going to spend on
rent in most cases is going to be more
than the cost of tuition and I looked at
going to university in Tokyo tuition was
a lot but the cost of living in Tokyo if
I wanted to do university there is so
astronomical I looked at doing
University in Hong Kong in a totally
different field I have looked at a
college program once what it was in
Manhattan New York New York you could be
spending so much money on rent that it
completely Dwarfs it completely
obliterates the significance of tuition
costs of Education right and then the
cost of rent again it's part of this
bizarre invidious cycle of capitalism
hollowing out and abandoning the
countryside abandoning the frontiers
abandoning the majority of every country
on Earth from Japan to Canada or the
United States and leaving us with this
remnant of overcrowded overpriced big
cities where all of the cultural and
economic life is almost forced to
transpire even past the point of
diminishing returns even to the point of
economic irrationality where people are
spending the majority of their income
just on rent which is again by textbook
definition something that is
economically irrational in Tokyo today
the the people who pay rent are poor and
the people who don't pay rent for
example because they inherited an
apartment that their grandfather
they're rich you can have two people who
have exactly the same you have two
people who both work as an accountant in
Tokyo but one of them pays rent you have
another one who might live in the same
apartment building but they don't pay
rent because they inherited that
apartment from their grandpa one of them
is rich one of them's for doing exactly
the same job at exactly the same level
of productivity making the same
contribution to society so these are my
these are my big simple completes about
what is wrong with capitalism and from
my perspective the tragedy is that these
problems can be solved and I think that
you know like with education No
who's motivated to solve the problem
who's even motivated to ask these
questions who's motivated to even
experiment with coming up with new
solutions who's motivated to take risks
and then be honest about which solutions
worked and which ones didn't the future
of capitalism you know again this comes
back to my major premise there is no
ideologies there is no utopia there is
no destination it's moving towards there
is no capitalist manifesto and whether
you find that inspirational or
depressing you have to admit to yourself
there is no one destination that unites
the fate of Japan of Canada of the
United States when I took a long train
journey around France recently so you
know when I visit my daughter end up
taking the train and a crazy zig-zag
pattern across France I was shocked
genuinely shocked to see that these same
factors the same hollowing out
phenomenon the abandonment of the
countryside was happening in France to
the same extent maybe it was even worse
in France than in Canada or Japan and
you know I like to read I started
reading articles about it I was reading
in English not in French but I found a
lot of magazine articles a lot of
newspaper articles discussing this
phenomenon and the struggle of
governments and in some cases charities
to try to prevent the abandonment of the
French countryside you know how can we
do this what are the what are the water
message methods to actually tackle the
problem the problems with capitalism
don't come from any one source from any
one cause and they're not tending toward
any one destination and it's for that
reason that we need to be willing to
experiment with many different solutions
and we need to be willing to learn from
many different failures never forget an
experiment by definition is something
undertaken
the outcome being unknown social
experiments political experiments our
ideas that we have to test without
knowing what the outcome may be